setfacl
===

Set file Access Control Lists (ACLs).

## Description

The **setfacl command** is used to set ACLs (Access Control Lists) on the command line. A sequence of commands is followed by a sequence of filenames.

### Options

```shell
-b, --remove-all: Remove all extended ACL entries. The base ACL entries (owner, group, and others) are retained.
-k, --remove-default: Remove the default ACL. If no default ACL exists, no warnings are issued.
-n, --no-mask: Do not recalculate the effective rights mask. The default behavior of setfacl is to recalculate the ACL mask unless a mask entry was explicitly given.
--mask: Recalculate the effective rights mask, even if an ACL mask entry was explicitly given.
-d, --default: All operations apply to the default ACL.
--restore=file: Restore an ACL backup from a file (these files can be generated by getfacl -R). This mechanism can restore ACLs for an entire directory tree. This parameter cannot be used with any other parameters except --test.
--test: Test mode. Instead of changing the ACLs of any files, the resulting ACLs are listed.
-R, --recursive: Apply operations to all files and directories recursively.
-L, --logical: Follow symbolic links. By default, it only follows symbolic link files and skips symbolic link directories.
-P, --physical: Skip all symbolic links, including symbolic link files.
--version: Output the version of setfacl and exit.
--help: Output help information.
--: End of command line options. All remaining parameters are interpreted as filenames.
-: If the filename is -, setfacl reads filenames from standard input.
```

*   The `-m` and `-x` options are followed by ACL rules. Multiple ACL rules are separated by commas (,). The `-M` and `-X` options are used to read ACL rules from a file or standard input.
*   The `--set` and `--set-file` options are used to set the ACL of a file or directory, replacing the previous settings.
*   The `-m (--modify)` and `-M (--modify-file)` options modify the ACL rules of a file or directory.
*   The `-x (--remove)` and `-X (--remove-file)` options remove ACL rules.

When reading rules from a file using the `-M` or `-X` options, `setfacl` accepts the format output by the `getfacl` command. There must be at least one rule per line, and lines starting with `#` are treated as comments.

If the `setfacl` command is used on a filesystem that does not support ACLs, it will modify the file permission bits. If the ACL rules do not perfectly match the file permission bits, `setfacl` will modify the permission bits to reflect the ACL rules as closely as possible, send an error message to standard error, and return with a status greater than 0.

**Permissions**

The owner of a file and processes with the `CAP_FOWNER` capability can set the ACL of a file. (On current Linux systems, the root user is usually the only user with the `CAP_FOWNER` capability.)

**ACL Rules**

The `setfacl` command recognizes the following rule formats:

```shell
[d[efault]:] [u[ser]:]uid [:perms]  Permissions for a specific user. Owner permissions if uid is not specified.
[d[efault]:] g[roup]:gid [:perms]   Permissions for a specific group. Owning group permissions if gid is not specified.
[d[efault]:] m[ask][:] [:perms]     Effective rights mask.
[d[efault]:] o[ther] [:perms]       Permissions for others.
```

Appropriate ACL rules are used in modify and set operations. For `uid` and `gid`, you can specify either a number or a name. The `perms` field is a combination of letters representing various permissions: read (`r`), write (`w`), and execute (`x`). Execute is only suitable for directories and some executable files. The `perms` field can also be set in octal format.

**Automatically Created Rules**

Initially, a file or directory contains only three basic ACL rules. For the rules to execute correctly, the following conditions must be met:

*   The three basic rules cannot be deleted.
*   Any rule containing a specific username or group name must contain a valid combination of permissions.
*   If any rule containing a default rule is used, the default rule must exist.

**ACL Terminology Definitions**

Let's look at the definitions of terms in ACLs. Most of these are taken from the man pages and are helpful for understanding the content below.

An ACL consists of a series of Access Entries. Each Access Entry defines the operations a specific category can perform on a file. An Access Entry has three components: Entry tag type, qualifier (optional), and permission.

First, let's look at the most important part, the Entry tag type:

```shell
ACL_USER_OBJ: Equivalent to the file owner's permission in Linux.
ACL_USER: Defines permissions for additional users.
ACL_GROUP_OBJ: Equivalent to the group's permission in Linux.
ACL_GROUP: Defines permissions for additional groups.
ACL_MASK: Defines the maximum permissions for ACL_USER, ACL_GROUP_OBJ, and ACL_GROUP (discussed further below).
ACL_OTHER: Equivalent to others' permission in Linux.
```

Let's use an example to illustrate. We will use the `getfacl` command to view a file with defined ACLs:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# getfacl ./test.txt
# file: test.txt
# owner: root
# group: admin
user::rw-
user:john:rw-
group::rw-
group:dev:r--
mask::rw- other::r--
```

The first three lines starting with `#` define the filename, file owner, and group. This information isn't crucial and can be omitted using `--omit-header`.

```shell
user::rw-       Defines ACL_USER_OBJ, indicating the file owner has read and write permissions.
user:john:rw-   Defines ACL_USER, giving user john read and write permissions to the file.
group::rw-      Defines ACL_GROUP_OBJ, indicating the file's group has read and write permissions.
group:dev:r--   Defines ACL_GROUP, giving the dev group read permission to the file.
mask::rw-       Defines ACL_MASK permissions as read and write.
other::r--      Defines ACL_OTHER permissions as read.
```

From this, we can see that ACLs provide the ability to define permissions for specific users and groups. Now let's see how to set a file's ACL:

**How to Set ACL Files**

First, let's discuss the format for setting ACL files. From the example above, each Access Entry consists of three fields separated by colons (:). The first is the Entry tag type.

```shell
user   Corresponds to ACL_USER_OBJ and ACL_USER.
group  Corresponds to ACL_GROUP_OBJ and ACL_GROUP.
mask   Corresponds to ACL_MASK.
other  Corresponds to ACL_OTHER.
```

The second field is the qualifier, such as `john` and the `dev` group in the example above. It defines the permissions for specific users and groups. Only `user` and `group` have qualifiers; others are empty. The third field is the familiar permission. It's defined the same way as Linux permissions.

Now let's see how to set the ACL for `test.txt` to meet the requirements mentioned above.

Initially, the file has no extra ACL attributes:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# ls -l
-rw-rw-r-- 1 root admin 0 Jul 3 22:06 test.txt

[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./test.txt
user::rw- group::rw- other::r--
```

First, let's give user `john` read and write permissions for `test.txt`:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# setfacl -m user:john:rw- ./test.txt
[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./test.txt
user::rw-
user:john:rw-
group::rw-
mask::rw-
other::r--
```

Now we can see that user `john` has read and write permissions in the ACL. If we check the Linux permissions, we'll notice something different.

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# ls -l ./test.txt
-rw-rw-r--+ 1 root admin 0 Jul 3 22:06 ./test.txt
```

A `+` sign has appeared at the end of the file permissions. When a file has an `ACL_USER` or `ACL_GROUP` value, it's called an ACL file, and the `+` sign is used to indicate this. We can also notice that when a file has an `ACL_USER` or `ACL_GROUP` value, `ACL_MASK` is also defined.

Next, let's set the `dev` group to have read permission:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# setfacl -m group:dev:r-- ./test.txt
[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./test.txt
user::rw-
user:john:rw-
group::rw-
group:dev:r--
mask::rw-
other::r--
```

This completes the requirements. Pretty simple, right?

**ACL_MASK and Effective Permissions**

It's important to highlight `ACL_MASK` here as it's key to mastering ACLs. In standard Linux file permissions, for something like `rw-rw-r--`, the middle `rw-` refers to the group permissions. However, in ACLs, this is only true if `ACL_MASK` does not exist. If a file has an `ACL_MASK` value, the middle `rw-` represents the mask value instead of the group permission.

Let's look at this example:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# ls -l
-rwxrw-r-- 1 root admin 0 Jul 3 23:10 test.sh
```

Here, `test.sh` only gives the file owner `root` read, write, and execute permissions. The `admin` group has only read and write permissions. Now we want user `john` to have the same permissions as `root`.

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# setfacl -m user:john:rwx ./test.sh
[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./test.sh
user::rwx user:john:rwx
group::rw-
mask::rwx
other::r--
```

We see `john` has `rwx` permissions and the mask value is also set to `rwx`. This is because the mask defines the maximum permissions for `ACL_USER`, `ACL_GROUP`, and `ACL_GROUP_OBJ`. Checking the Linux permissions for `test.sh` now:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# ls -l
-rwxrwxr--+ 1 root admin 0 Jul 3 23:10 test.sh
```

So, what happens if a user in the `admin` group tries to execute `test.sh`? They will be denied permission. This is because the `admin` group actually only has read and write permissions. The `rwx` shown in the middle is the `ACL_MASK` value, not the group's permission.

Therefore, if a file has the `+` mark, you must use `getfacl` to confirm its actual permissions to avoid confusion.

Let's look at another example. Suppose we set the mask for `test.sh` to read-only. Will users in the `admin` group still have write permission?

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# setfacl -m mask::r-- ./test.sh
[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./test.sh
user::rwx
user:john:rwx   #effective:r--
group::rw-      #effective:r--
mask::r--
other::r--
```

Now we see `#effective:r--` next to `ACL_USER` and `ACL_GROUP_OBJ`. What does this mean? Let's revisit the definition of `ACL_MASK`. It defines the maximum permissions for `ACL_USER`, `ACL_GROUP_OBJ`, and `ACL_GROUP`. In our example, their maximum permission is read-only. Even though we set other permissions for `ACL_USER` and `ACL_GROUP_OBJ`, their effective permission is only read.

Checking the Linux file permissions for `test.sh` again, the group permission will show the mask value (i.e., `r--`):

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# ls -l
-rwxr--r--+ 1 root admin 0 Jul 3 23:10 test.sh
```

**Default ACL**

Everything discussed so far relates to Access ACLs, which apply to files. Now let's briefly discuss Default ACLs. A Default ACL is set on a directory, and files created within that directory will inherit its ACL.

Let's test this. For example, the `root` user creates a directory named `dir`:

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# mkdir dir
```

The user wants all files created in this directory to be accessible by user `john`. So, we should set a Default ACL for the `dir` directory.

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# setfacl -d -m user:john:rw ./dir
[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./dir
user::rwx
group::rwx
other::r-x
default:user::rwx
default:user:john:rwx
default:group::rwx
default:mask::rwx
default: other::r-x
```

Here we see the ACL has the `default` option defined, and user `john` has default read, write, and execute permissions. All undefined defaults are copied from the file permissions. Now the `root` user creates a `test.txt` file in `dir`.

```shell
[root@localhost ~]# touch ./dir/test.txt
[root@localhost ~]# ls -l ./dir/test.txt
-rw-rw-r--+ 1 root root 0 Jul 3 23:46 ./dir/test.txt

[root@localhost ~]# getfacl --omit-header ./dir/test.txt
user::rw-
user:john:rw-
group::rwx #effective:rw-
mask::rw-
other::r--
```

We see that for the file created in `dir`, user `john` automatically has read and write permissions.

**ACL Related Commands**

In the previous examples, we noted that `getfacl` is used to read a file's ACL and `setfacl` is used to set a file's Access ACL. There is also `chacl`, which is used to change a file or directory's Access ACL and Default ACL; see the man page for specific parameters. I want to mention `chacl -B`, which can completely remove the ACL attributes (including Default ACL) of a file or directory. For instance, even if you use `setfacl -x` to delete all ACL attributes, the `+` sign might still appear at the end of the filename. The correct way to remove it is using `chacl -B`. When using `cp` to copy files, you can add the `-p` option to copy the file's ACL attributes; a warning will be issued for ACL attributes that cannot be copied.

The `mv` command will move the file's ACL attributes by default, and similarly, a warning will be issued if the operation is not allowed.

**Points to Note**

If your filesystem does not support ACLs, you may need to remount it:

```shell
mount -o remount,acl [mount point]
```

Using the `chmod` command to change Linux file permissions will also change the corresponding ACL values, and vice versa.
